CDRIVER-6276 add initial AGENTS.md and testing skill (#2356)
mongodb/mongo-c-driver: AGENTS.md

**Build performance:** Ninja parallelizes builds across all available cores by default; to cap the job count, set `CMAKE_BUILD_PARALLEL_LEVEL=<N>` in the environment before running `cmake --build`.

> [!NOTE]
> `.evergreen/scripts/compile.sh` is the authoritative reference for CI configure-build-install routines. Consult it for details on Ninja generator selection, ccache integration, sanitizer flags (`MONGO_SANITIZE`), client-side encryption (`ENABLE_CLIENT_SIDE_ENCRYPTION`), and other platform-specific options.

## Running Tests

The typical configure and build steps for testing:

```bash
cmake -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -B cmake-build
cmake --build cmake-build --target test-libmongoc
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The "Debug" config type is recommended for local testing and development.
> If the project was already built with a different build type and the user has not requested a change, preserve the existing `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` rather than switching to `Debug`, and advise the user that switching to `Debug` is recommended for local testing and development.
> This configure step replaces the release/installation configure above - running both is unnecessary when developing.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> [!IMPORTANT]
> For multi-configuration generators (e.g. "Visual Studio *", "Ninja Multi-Config"), executables appear under a `<config>/` subdirectory (e.g. `cmake-build/src/bsoncxx/test/Debug/test-libmongoc`).

```

Suggest including [this note](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/blob/c7736cb823ef71c9bd11b5e692cc78e60412327d/AGENTS.md#L80-L81) to prevent agents from being confused by multi-config generator behavior (they may start searching around or attempt vain rebuilds to find/generate the missing test executable).

### Vendored Third-Party Libraries

There are several third-party libraries in the repository source tree to enable self-contained builds:

| Repository | Source Tree Location (where `<version>` is a placeholder for the version number) |
|---|---|
| https://github.com/mnunberg/jsonsl | `src/libbson/src/jsonsl` |
| https://github.com/JuliaStrings/utf8proc | `src/utf8proc-<version>` |
| https://github.com/troydhanson/uthash | `src/uthash/uthash-<version>` |
| https://github.com/madler/zlib | `src/zlib-<version>` |

### C Standard

Uses C99. Contributions shall not use features from newer standards.

## Documentation

Documentation is authored as separate `.rst` files under `src/libbson/doc` and `src/libmongoc/doc`, and generated with Sphinx. There is a document for each public API type (e.g., `src/libmongoc/doc/mongoc_client_t.rst`) and function (e.g., `src/libmongoc/doc/mongoc_client_new.rst`).

To build `libmongoc` documentation from a fresh environment with warnings treated as errors:

```bash

> uv run --frozen sphinx-build -WEn src/libmongoc/doc src/libmongoc/doc/html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv run --frozen sphinx-build -j auto -WEn src/libmongoc/doc src/libmongoc/doc/html
```
Suggest adding `-j auto` to improve doc build performance.

```

Replace `libmongoc` with `libbson` in the above command for `libbson` documentation.

## Before Committing

Always format before committing:

```bash
uv run --frozen tools/format.py           # C/C++ source files.
uv run --frozen tools/ruff-format-all.sh  # Python scripts.
uv run --frozen tools/shfmt-format-all.sh # Shell scripts.
```

`--frozen` ensures the pinned lockfile is used; if it fails with a lockfile error, update it with `uv sync`.

> 

Reviewer: Suggest omitting this line: handling unexpected dependency failures should be the user's responsibility.

Author: Agreed, but FYI, this line was copied directly from the C++ Driver's AGENTS.md: https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/blob/c7736cb823ef71c9bd11b5e692cc78e60412327d/AGENTS.md?plain=1#L143

Reviewer: Posted for consistency: https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/pull/1688

## Contributing

> See `CONTRIBUTING.md` for guidance on:

Reviewer: Following usage by agents via this new AGENTS.md, suggest also making minimal updates to `CONTRIBUTING.md` for accuracy and prevent agent confusion:

- Update [this line](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-c-driver/blob/fe6d8116d2231d1a0d7133da35b354e7ef7dd6e9/CONTRIBUTING.md#L151) and other references to `test-libmongoc`: `./test-libmongoc` -> `./cmake-build/src/libmongoc/test-libmongoc` (binary directory consistency with AGENTS.md; [some parts](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-c-driver/blob/fe6d8116d2231d1a0d7133da35b354e7ef7dd6e9/CONTRIBUTING.md#L304) already assume `cmake-build`)
- Consider mentioning the `running-test-libmongoc` skill in [this paragraph](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-c-driver/blob/fe6d8116d2231d1a0d7133da35b354e7ef7dd6e9/CONTRIBUTING.md#L340-L341).

> [!NOTE]
> `.evergreen/scripts/compile.sh` is the authoritative reference for CI configure-build-install routines. Consult it for details on Ninja generator selection, ccache integration, sanitizer flags (`MONGO_SANITIZE`), client-side encryption (`ENABLE_CLIENT_SIDE_ENCRYPTION`), and other platform-specific options.

## Running Tests

The typical configure and build steps for testing:

```bash
cmake -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -B cmake-build
cmake --build cmake-build --target test-libmongoc
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The "Debug" config type is recommended for local testing and development.
> If the project was already built with a different build type and the user has not requested a change, preserve the existing `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` rather than switching to `Debug`, and advise the user that switching to `Debug` is recommended for local testing and development.
> This configure step replaces the release/installation configure above - running both is unnecessary when developing.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > For multi-configuration generators (e.g. "Visual Studio *", "Ninja Multi-Config"), executables appear under a `<config>/` subdirectory (e.g. `cmake-build/src/bsoncxx/test/Debug/test-libmongoc`).

Reviewer 2: To fix path:

```suggestion
> For multi-configuration generators (e.g. "Visual Studio *", "Ninja Multi-Config"), executables appear under a `<config>/` subdirectory (e.g. `cmake-build/src/libmongoc/Debug/test-libmongoc`).
```

For comparison: my Windows spawn host uses `C:\code\mongo-c-driver\cmake-build\src\libmongoc\Debug\test-libmongoc.exe` on the Visual Studio build.

Test executables are excluded from the `ALL` CMake target, so it is necessary to specify a target with the `--target` flag when building tests. The target `test-libmongoc` contains the majority of the test cases. The target `mongo_c_driver_tests` is a custom CMake target that can be used to build all test executables.

> Most tests require a live MongoDB server. Server-dependent tests are skipped when no server is available.

Reviewer 2: Suggest clarifying that skipping server tests must be configured. `TestSuite_CheckLive` checks for an environment variable.

```suggestion
Most tests require a live MongoDB server. Server-dependent tests may be skipped with the environment variable `MONGOC_TEST_SKIP_LIVE`.
```

- `test-azurekms`: Client-Side Field Level Encryption (CSFLE) test for automatic Azure KMS credentials. Creates a data key with an empty `azure` KMS provider so credentials are obtained from the Azure VM-assigned managed identity. Must run on a configured Azure VM.
- `test-gcpkms`: CSFLE test for automatic GCP KMS credentials. Creates a data key with an empty `gcp` KMS provider so credentials are obtained from a GCP attached service account. Must run on a configured GCP VM.
- `test-awsauth`: `MONGODB-AWS` authentication mechanism tests, intended to run within an AWS ECS task or EC2 instance.

## Architecture

The repository provides several public, private, and vendored libraries, each under `src/`:

### Public Libraries

#### `libbson`

A public standalone BSON document library with no MongoDB dependency.

#### `libmongoc`

The public MongoDB C Driver. Depends on the `libbson` library.

> #### `kms-message`

Reviewer 2: Suggest moving `kms-message` under "Private Libraries". The source files are copied from libmongocrypt and built [directly into libmongoc](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-c-driver/blob/fe6d8116d2231d1a0d7133da35b354e7ef7dd6e9/src/libmongoc/CMakeLists.txt#L833). So I consider it more of an implementation detail.

> A library used to generate requests for Amazon Web Services Key Management Service (KMS) and Azure Key Vault.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A library used to generate requests for Amazon Web Services requests to implement `MONGODB-AWS` auth.
```

Despite the name, KMS request is only used to create signed AWS requests for the `MONGODB-AWS` [auth mechanism](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-c-driver/blob/fe6d8116d2231d1a0d7133da35b354e7ef7dd6e9/src/libmongoc/src/mongoc/mongoc-cluster-aws.c#L1133) (not KMS).

The C driver might create KMS requests through the libmongocrypt dependency (which has its own copy of kms-message).
